CAMEL-23969: Add openai:responses operation for the Responses API (#25116)
apache/camel: components/camel-ai/camel-openai/src/main/docs/openai-responses.adoc

= OpenAI - Responses API Operation
:tabs-sync-option:

xref:ROOT:openai-component.adoc[Back to OpenAI Component]

The `responses` operation calls the OpenAI Responses API (non-streaming). It supports the same text and image
input ergonomics as `chat-completion`, maps `systemMessage` to API `instructions`, and exposes
`CamelOpenAIResponseId` plus token usage headers. Use `previousResponseId` / `CamelOpenAIPreviousResponseId` for
server-side conversation state.

Hosted tools: set `builtinTools` to a comma-separated list (`web_search`, `file_search`, `code_interpreter`).
`file_search` requires `fileSearchVectorStoreIds`. Pass hosted MCP tool definitions as JSON via `hostedMcpTools`.

When `storeFullResponse=true`, the SDK `Response` object is stored on exchange property `CamelOpenAIResponsesResponse`.

[tabs]

> ====

Reviewer: The code example only has a `Java::` tab. All sibling sub-pages (`openai-mcp.adoc`, `openai-operations.adoc`, `openai-providers.adoc`) provide both Java and YAML tabs. Please add a `YAML::` tab with the equivalent YAML DSL example for consistency.

Author: Added a `YAML::` tab with equivalent route examples in `6483bf0c541`.

_AI-generated reply on behalf of @atiaomar1978-hub._

Java::
+
[source,java]
----
from("direct:ask")
    .to("openai:responses?model=gpt-4o&systemMessage=You are a support assistant")
    .log("Answer: ${body} id: ${header.CamelOpenAIResponseId}");

from("direct:continue")
    .setHeader("CamelOpenAIPreviousResponseId", variable("lastId"))
    .to("openai:responses?model=gpt-4o")
    .setVariable("lastId", header("CamelOpenAIResponseId"));
----
====

Streaming is not supported on this operation; use `chat-completion` for streaming.

> Function tools wired to Camel routes are intentionally deferred (see CAMEL-23382 / CAMEL-23969).

Reviewer: JIRA ticket IDs (`CAMEL-23382 / CAMEL-23969`) are not meaningful to end users reading the docs. Consider replacing with descriptive prose, e.g.:

```suggestion
Function tools wired to Camel routes are not yet supported on this operation.
```

Author: Replaced the JIRA references with user-facing prose in `6483bf0c541`.

_AI-generated reply on behalf of @atiaomar1978-hub._
